Avalanche comparison (#3784)
w3f/polkadot-wiki: docs/learn/learn-comparisons-avalanche.md

---
id: learn-comparisons-avalanche
title: Polkadot and Avalanche
sidebar_label: Avalanche
description: A high-level comparison between Polkadot and Avalanche.
keywords: [avalance, proof of stake, comparison]
slug: ../learn-comparisons-avalanche
---

<!-- Add more infographics to this page -->

> Polkadot and Avalanche both have an architecture that allows for application-specific blockchains to be designed and connected via a "main" chain. In Polkadot, this is the Relay-chain and Avalanche does this with 3 primary chains - the P-chain, X-chain, and C-chain. Similar to how Polkadot has its Parachains that connect to the Relay-chain, Avalanche has what're called subnets. Subnets are application-specific chains that can be deployed alongside the primary chains. Similar to Polkadot, Avalanche also uses a PoS mechanism in its consensus algorithm to elect its validators who stake their AVAX tokens in order to become validators and secure the network.

Reviewer: "via" changed to "to". Avalanche does not have a cross-chain connection via their main chain yet. This can be perceived as though the subnets are connected (to each other) via main chain.

```suggestion
Polkadot and Avalanche both have an architecture that allows for application-specific blockchains to be designed and connected to a "main" chain. In Polkadot, the "main" chain is the Relay-chain and Avalanche does this with 3 primary chains - the P-chain, X-chain, and C-chain. Similar to how Polkadot has its Parachains that connect to the Relay-chain, Avalanche has what're called [subnets](https://docs.avax.network/subnets). Subnets are application-specific, sovereign chains that can be deployed alongside the primary chains. Similar to Polkadot, Avalanche also uses a PoS mechanism for achieving consensus. The validators stake their AVAX tokens in order to participate in the PoS system and secure the network.
```

> ## Model

Reviewer: This section can be merged with Architecture section
```suggestion

```

> Avalanche's architecture separates the responsibility of a layer-1 smart contract platform into three manageable chains. This allows for a separation of concern over consensus, transactions, and smart contract execution runtime. Polkadot is not a smart contract platform and does not have plans to be. The Relay-chain manages the consensus layer as well as the transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

## Architecture

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Avalanche's architecture separates the responsibility of a layer-1 smart contract platform into three manageable chains. This allows for a separation of concern over consensus, transactions, and smart contract execution runtime. Polkadot is not a smart contract platform and does not have plans to be. The Relay-chain manages the consensus layer as well as the transactions.
```

> ![Avalanche Network](../assets/comparisons/avalanche/avalanche-network.png)

Reviewer: Please attribute image credits to the source

> As aforementioned, the Avalanche architecture is comprised of three different chains. With this model, the separations of concerns target the main platform, exchange, and contracts. It also has what're called Subnets, which allow a subsection of the validators to validate blockchains that are built on top of Avalanche. Additionally, the chain in Avalanche is not linear, rather it's a DAG(Directed Acyclic Graph).

Reviewer: I'm removing this part, as there are multiple issues with this part of the writeup

1. We already talked about the separation of consensus, transaction and smartcontract execution earlier. Would it make sense to include that they correspond to main network, exchange of assets and contracts right there instead of repeating it here?

2. Earlier, we introduced Subnets are sovereign and application specific blockchains. Here, we are redefining them as a subsection of validators. Which one is the right interpretation of a subnet? If both are correct, then rephrase this in a better way.

3. Avalanche has three chains. Which one is a DAG? Are subnets DAGs as well? I remember reading that only one of these chains is a DAG, but I cannot recollect the source. Might be worth a deeper look

```suggestion
```

Author: 1. Yes
2. Yeah maybe sovereign wasn't the right term here. Subnets allow protocol devs to choose the VM, set the fees, and create the tokenomics. I'll rephrase.
3. P-chain is a DAG afaict, but the docs do not clarify this.

#### P-chain (Platform)

> The P-chain is responsible for the validator set and securing the network. AVAX token holders can spin up their own nodes and become validators by staking their tokens. Similar to the NPoS system that Polkadot uses, Avalanche uses a Delegated PoS which allows token holders who do not want to spin up their own node to become validators to delegate their token stake to existing validators. When a new subnet is spun up, it will also be connected to the p-chain. 

Reviewer: > When a new subnet is spun up, it will also be connected to the p-chain. 

Please rephrase the above line. It is not clear what will be connected to the p-chain. The blockchain of the subnet? The. validators of the subnet? Does the subnet only connect to the p-chain and not the other chains?

```suggestion
The P-chain is responsible for maintaining the validator set and securing the network. AVAX token holders can spin up their own nodes and become validators by staking their tokens. Similar to the NPoS system that Polkadot uses, Avalanche uses a Delegated PoS which allows token holders to delegate their token stake to existing validators, instead of spinning up their own nodes.
```

#### X-chain (Exchange)

The X-chain is responsible for the transaction layer of the Avalanche blockchain. It uses a UTXO model like Bitcoin whereas Polkadot uses an account model like Ethereum.

#### C-chain (Contracts)

The C-chain is where the most activity will happen on the Avalanche network. It allows for different virtual machines to execute smart contract code. Out of the box, it has support for EVM and AVM (Avalanche VM). 

> As Polkadot does not have a smart contract layer out of the box, the EVM and WASM smart contract abilities lie in the Parachain layers. This is a major difference between Polkadot and Avalanche. The smart-contract abilities of Avalanche are baked into the main chain. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As Polkadot does not have a smart contract layer out of the box, the EVM and WASM smart contract abilities lie in the Parachain layers. This is a major difference between Polkadot and Avalanche. The smart-contract abilities of Avalanche are baked into its three-chain model. 
```

#### Subnets or sub-networks

> Subnets can be public or private and allow developers to design and launch a blockchain on Avalanche. There are one or many validators that are subsets from the overall validator set of the network. Any validator in the Avalanche network has to validate all three chains making them a part of the primary network subnet. Subnets can validate any blockchain, however, each blockchain is validated by exactly one subnet. Subnets are a way to create application-specific chains with their own logic and consensus, but also be a part of the Primary Network.

Reviewer: > Subnets are a way to create application-specific chains with their own logic and consensus, but also be a part of the Primary Network.

This does not make sense here as we defined "Subnets are application-specific chains that can be deployed alongside the primary chains" in the opening paragraph of this doc.

>  Subnets can validate any blockchain, however, each blockchain is validated by exactly one subnet.

This does not make sense either

May be if we define the subnets as validator subset instead, this sounds correct.

Author: From the docs, "subnet" as a word is used for both the subset of validators as well as the name for the subnet runtime. But clarified a bit further and I think it sounds better now.

## Consensus 

> ![Avalanche Network](../assets/comparisons/avalanche/avalanche-consensus-protocols.png)

Reviewer: Add attributions to the source

Avalanche consensus uses a family of protocols to achieve security, liveness, and finality. These are known as the Snow* protocols. This group of protocols composed together uses both classical and Nakamoto consensus as well as a Delegated Proof-of-Stake system for its block creators.

> The Snow family is a hierarchical collection of systems used to reach finality on Avalanche:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Snow family](https://docs.avax.network/overview/getting-started/avalanche-consensus) is a hierarchical collection of systems used to reach finality on Avalanche:
```

- Slush
- Snowflake
- Snowball
- Avalanche
- Snowman
- Slushie

> Compared to Polkadot, Avalanche uses an asynchronous hybrid system that is based on a classical and Nakomoto approach. Polkadot uses a synchronous hybrid model that combines BABE and GRADNPA, where BABE is the algorithm used to build blocks in a probabilistic way, and GRANDPA is a finality mechanism that uses a deterministic approach to adding blocks to the longest chain. In the end, validators agree to whole chains, rather than single new blocks.

Reviewer: Add markdown links to GRANDPA and BABE here

### Snowball 

The snowball protocol is an algorithm that nodes use to come to a consensus. Each node continuously queries x number of validators and takes the majority consensus and adopts it as its own. This method, in normal circumstances, will lead to the network reaching a consensus. The scalability of Snowball is promising, as the number of participants in the network grows, the number of consensus messages being passed around remains the same. Nodes will query no more than 20 nodes at a given time.

### DAG(Directed Acyclic Graph)

[DAGs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph) are graphs consisting of vertices and edges. In Avalanche they are used for **partial ordering** of decisions, such as transactions. Vertices point to each other using edges, and when ordered topologically vertices and edges create a sequence. Edges in the case of Avalanche can be conflicting, and nodes will use the snowball algorithm to make decisions about which edges to keep and which to not. 

## Staking Mechanics

> Avalanche uses a Delegated Proof-of-Stake mechanism without any slashing. The barrier to entry for staking as a full node validator is 2500 AVAX, and 25 AVAX to become a delegator. With a minimum stake period being two weeks and a maximum period being a year, for both validators and delegators. Validators acquire points for uptime and correctness of their work, and the remuneration of rewards depends on that.

Reviewer: Might be worth mentioning about Polkadot staking parameters here as well. Also, curious to know what happens after a year? Do the stakers have to re-stake?

<!-- Staking points and how they are occurred is not clear in the documentation -->

## Message Passing

> Avalanche does not have a native trustless message-passing mechanism. Instead, it relies on bridges. Though, because it is an EVM-compatible protocol, it's able to interoperate at a token level. However, subnets do not have a messaging layer out of the box. Polkadot, with its XCM and XCMP messaging protocols, allows for a native and trustless messaging scheme, thus supporting the composability of chains and enabling the development of powerful cross-chain applications.

Reviewer: Add markdown links for XCM and XCMP

bond before participating in the system.
- **Minimum staking time for a node:** The minimal amount of time required for a node to stake into the system.
- **Maximum staking time for a node:** The maximal amount of time a node can stake.
- **Minting rate:** Reward rate function, also referred to as minting rate, determines the reward a
participant can claim as a function of their staking amount given some number of x publicly disclosed nodes
under its ownership, over a period of t consecutive *minimal staking time* timeframes, such that t*minimal staking time* ≤ *maximum staking time*.
- **Transaction fee amount:** The fee structure, which is a set of governable fees parameters that specify costs to various transactions.

Limiting the governance functionality is a design choice to increase predictability and safety.

Polkadot's governance mechanism has been in production from the very beginning and was used to slowly release functionality and decentralize the initial network. It is also not limited to a few parameters and in fact, the whole runtime is subject to change via protocol making Polkadot a meta-protocol.

## Upgrades

> The upgrades to Avalanche are administered by the protocol developers at Avax Labs. On Polkadot, the forkless upgrades are administered and deployed through the on-chain governance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The upgrades to Avalanche are administered by the protocol developers at [Ava Labs](https://www.avalabs.org/). On Polkadot, the forkless upgrades are administered and deployed through the on-chain governance.
```

## In the physical realm

Ava Labs, founded by Emin Gün Sirer is based in Brooklyn, NY, and is currently the main organization behind the development of Avalanche consensus and the Avalanche Primary Network. Emin, a professor at Cornell and known for his work in the Bitcoin ecosystem, namely around the "selfish mining" attack together with Maofan Ted Yin produced the research and ideas for Avalanche at Cornell. 

## Conclusion

> Avalanche has made some design decisions that allow for an improved smart-contract development environment in which protocol engineers can have the freedom to create their own blockchains and include them in the Avalanche ecosystem via subnets. The trade-offs are that the autonomy of design is limited and blockchains have to buy into the design decisions of Avalanche's main chains. Subnets are not able to share the security of the main chains. However, they are able to utilize the low-transaction fee to create working applications quickly. We have even seen some Ethereum projects move to Avalanche to take advantage of the lower fees. Whereas Polkadot provides a heterogeneous model, in which blockchains have ultimate autonomy in the way they design their consensus systems, and on top of that are able to share the security of the Relay-chain, and use XCM to pass native trustless messages, instead of having to rely on bridges.

Reviewer: > Whereas Polkadot provides a heterogeneous model, in which blockchains have ultimate autonomy in the way they design their consensus systems

Might need to rephrase this. Parachains cannot have their own consensus model for Block finality. Block production, yes. But not finality.

```suggestion
Avalanche has made some design decisions that allow for an improved smart-contract development environment in which protocol engineers can have the freedom to create their own blockchains and include them in the Avalanche ecosystem via subnets. The trade-offs are that the autonomy of design is limited and blockchains have to buy into the design decisions of Avalanche's main chains. Subnets are not able to share the security of the main chains. However, they are able to utilize the low-transaction fee to create working applications quickly. We have even seen some Ethereum projects move to Avalanche to take advantage of the lower fees. Whereas Polkadot provides a heterogeneous model, in which blockchains have ultimate autonomy in the way they design their consensus systems, and on top of that are able to share the security of the Relay-chain, and use XCM to pass native trustless messages, instead of having to rely on bridges.
```
